Neutral Citation Number: [2004] EWCA (Civ) 845\t \t
Case No: B1/2003/1742 PTA\t \t
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE\t \t
COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)\t \t
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
FAMILY DIVISION\t \t
MR JUSTICE BENNETT\t \t
FD03P00743 & FD99D02334\t \t
Royal Courts of Justice\t \t
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL\t \t
Date: \t01/07/2004\t \t
Before:\t \t
LORD JUSTICE THORPE\t \t
LORD JUSTICE SEDLEY\t \t
and \t
LADY JUSTICE ARDEN\t \t
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - \t
Between:\t \t
\u{A0} \tDr Michael John Pelling \tAppellant\t \t
\u{A0} \t-v-\t \t\u{A0} \t
\u{A0} \tMrs Veronica Nana Bruce-Williams\t \tRespondent\t \t
\u{A0} \tSecretary Of State For Constituional Affairs\t \tInterested Party\t \t
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - \t
Dr Pelling in person\t \t
Mr S Cobb QC \tfor the \tSecretary of State for Constitutional Affairs\t \t
Hearing dates : 29 \tth\t March 2004 \t
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - \t
Judgment\t \t
Lord Justice Thorpe:\t \t
1.
This is the judgment of the court.
2.
Dr Pelling, the appellant, has acquired a considerable command of the law and the practice of the
courts in which applications under the Children Act 1989 are listed. He has also acquired
considerable experience of the work of this court. This has been acquired in the course of his
appearances either as a litigant in person or as a McKenzie friend appearing with other litigants in
person.

3.
Issues in relation to the appellant’s son, Michael Alexander Pelling Bruce, resulted in cross-
applications in the Bow County Court for a residence order fixed to commence on the 14 \tth\t March\t
1996. The appellant, who has consistently campaigned on family justice issues, sought an order from
His Honour Judge Goldstein that the whole case, including judgment, should be heard in open court
with full access to the public at large. Judge Goldstein refused that application but granted Dr Pelling
leave to appeal. His appeal failed in this court on the 20 \tth\t June 1996. The case is reported as \tRe P-B\t \t
(a minor)(child cases: hearings in open court)\t (1997) 1 All ER 58. During the course of his submissions\t
Dr Pelling asserted that the denial of a public hearing breached his rights under Articles 6 and 10 of
the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Butler-
Sloss LJ, giving the leading judgment, noted that the Convention had not yet been incorporated within
the law of England. However she continued at 61C: -
"Article 6 (1) provides for the public hearing and the public pronouncement of judgment of cases, but
with the proviso of exclusion of the press and the public from all or part of the trial "in the interest of
morals, public order or national security in a democratic society, where the interests of juveniles or
the protection of the private life of the parties so require."
The right of freedom of expression contained in Article 10(1) is subject to formalities, conditions,
restrictions or penalties which may be imposed by the member state under Article 10(2). It would
seem to me that the present procedures in family proceedings are in accordance with the spirit of the
Convention."
4.
Dr Pelling was dissatisfied with the judgments of this court and accordingly, together with Mr B, took
the point to the European Court of Human Rights. On the 24 \tth\t April 2001 the European court\t
rejected both cases holding, by a majority of five to two, that there had been no violation of the Article
6 rights of either applicant and that it was not necessary to consider separately their complaints
under Article 10: for that decision see \tB v. UK; P v. UK,\t conveniently reported at (2001) 2FLR 261. \t
5.
Although thereafter Dr Pelling continued to be active both as a campaigner and as a McKenzie friend,
proceedings in relation to his own child remained dormant between the 1996 adjudication and Dr
Pelling’s application in the High Court of the 15 \tth\t January 2003 for a joint residence order. \t
6.
The resumption of proceedings to which Dr Pelling was a party presented him with an opportunity to
revive in a direct way his campaign for open court hearings. Accordingly Dr Pelling included in his
joint residence application on form C2 an application for: -
"3. Trial in open Court with public pronouncement of judgment.
4. Declaration of incompatibility of section 97(2) Children Act 1989 with Articles 6 and 10 EHCR."
By a supplementary application dated 17 \tth\t March 2003 Dr Pelling moved for an order of Certiorari to\t
quash Rule 4.16(7) of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991, and Rules 4.23(1) and 10.20(3) so far as
they prevent disclosure or inspection respectively of Children Act judgments without leave of the
judge. It was said that those rules are incompatible with Articles 6(1) and 10(1) of the European
Convention.
7.

During the course of the preparation of her case the respondent sought an order under section 91(14)
of the Children Act 1989 restraining Dr Pelling from issuing further applications without permission of
the court. Shortly before the hearing Hughes J, in the course of giving directions, invited the
Secretary of State to attend the hearing and adjourned to the trial judge all procedural issues flowing
from Dr Pelling’s applications for a declaration of incompatibility and Certiorari \t. \t
8.
The trial took place on the 5 \tth\t and 6 \tth\t June 2003 when both parents appeared in person and Mr\t
Stephen Cobb QC represented the Crown. On the 2 \tnd\t July Bennett J handed down his reserved\t
judgment in chambers dismissing Dr Pelling’s application for a joint residence order. He granted the
cross-application for an order under section 91(14).
9.
On the same day Bennett J handed down his reserved judgment on the issues arising under the
European Convention and the Human Rights Act 1998. That judgment was handed down in open court
but subject to the restriction that in any report the anonymity of the child and the adult members of
the family must be strictly preserved. The case is reported as \tP v. BW\t (Children Cases: Hearings in\t
Public)\t [2004] 1 FLR 171. \t
10.
Dr Pelling sought permission to appeal all outcomes. His permission application in relation to the
refusal of the joint residence order was dismissed by this court on the 30 \tth\t July. On the same day this\t
court granted Dr Pelling permission to appeal the section 91(14) order. That appeal succeeded on the
11 \tth\t November 2003. The application for permission to appeal the European Convention and Human\t
Rights Act points was eventually listed, with appeal to follow if permission granted, to be heard before
a specially constituted court on 29 \tth\t March 2004. The respondent has taken no part and accordingly\t
the court has been entirely dependent on the Crown to advance contrary argument. We express our
gratitude to Mr Stephen Cobb QC for his skeleton argument and for the manner in which he has
addressed a variety of submissions advanced in Dr Pelling’s oral argument not foreshadowed by his
written skeletons dated 10 \tth\t July 2003, 5 \tth\t November 2003 and 25 \tth\t March 2004. We invited him to\t
deal with these fresh issues in a subsequent written skeleton to which Dr Pelling has filed a
subsequent written skeleton in response. The submission of further written argument was completed
on 6 \tth\t May. \t
11.
Given the nature of the submissions in Dr Pelling’s written skeletons we allowed Dr Pelling to develop
his case as though at the hearing of an appeal rather than a bare application for permission.
12.
Dr Pelling, taking advantage of the opportunity presented by his appearance in this court as a litigant
in person, at the outset objected to the notice on the door of the court warning the public against
identification of children within the proceedings, submitting that that was an unwarranted and illegal
restriction on his and the public’s entitlement to open justice. Equally he objected to any blanket
imposition of reporting restrictions. This was a point that the court had not anticipated and, in the
exercise of our discretion, we imposed the usual restrictions pending delivery of judgment on all
issues.
13.
The judgment of Bennett J is clear and comprehensive. Having regard to the decision of the European
Court in \tB v. UK; P v. UK \the held that Rule 4.16(7) was not inconsistent with Dr Pelling’s convention

rights. He held that the decisions of this court, not only in \tRe P-B \tbut also in \tClibbery v. Allan \t(2002) 1\t
FLR 565, were to the same effect. He refused Dr Pelling’s applications for a declaration of
incompatibility and for Certiorari.
14.
Bennett J then proceeded to exercise the discretion which Rule 4.16(7) vested in him. For six stated
reasons he concluded that the hearing of the application for a joint residence order should be in
chambers.
15.
When Bennett J subsequently indicated an intention to pronounce his judgment on the joint residence
application in private Dr Pelling objected. He argued that since it was an unexceptional case the
judgment should be pronounced in public and should not be anonymised. Bennett J rejected these
submissions, stating his reasons for concluding that the judgment should be delivered in private.
Finally Bennett J explained his reasons for rejecting Dr Pelling’s application, at the opening of the
hearing on the 5 \tth\t June, for the evidence and submissions in relation to public hearing to be\t
themselves heard in public.
16.
Before turning to the submissions it is necessary to record the terms of the statutory material put in
issue by Dr Pelling’s applications. Insofar as material to the present appeal S.97 of the Children Act
1989 provides: -
"(1)
2.
No person shall publish any material which is intended, or likely, to identify –
(a) any child as being involved in any proceedings before the High Court, a County Court or a
Magistrates’ Court in which any power under this Act may be exercised by the court with respect to
that or any other child; or
(b) an address or school as being that of a child involved in any such proceedings.
(3)
(4) The court or the Lord Chancellor may, if satisfied that the welfare of the child requires it, by order
dispense with the requirements of sub-section (2) to such extent as may be specified in the order.
(5)
(6) Any person who contravenes this section shall be guilty of an offence and liable, on summary
conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale.
(7)
(8)"
17.
Turning now to the Family Proceedings Rules 1991, the heading to Rule 4.16 is: "Attendance at
Directions Appointment and Hearing." Paragraph 7 of the Rule reads:

"Unless the court otherwise directs a hearing of, or directions appointment in, proceedings to which
this Part applies shall be in chambers."
18.
Rule 4.23 is headed: "Confidentiality of Documents". Paragraph 1 of the Rule provides:
"Notwithstanding any rule of court to the contrary, no document, other than a record of an order, held
by the court and relating to proceedings to which this Part applies shall be disclosed, other than to –
b.
a party
c.
the legal representative of a party
d.
the children’s guardian
e.
the Legal Aid Board, or
f.
a welfare officer or children and family reporter
g.
an expert whose instruction by a party has been authorised by the court,
without leave of the judge or district judge."
1.
Rule 10.20 is headed: "Inspection etc of documents retained in court" and paragraph 3 of the Rule
reads as follows: -
"Except as provided by Rules 2.36 (4) and 3.16 (10) and paragraphs (1) and (2) of this rule, no
document filed or lodged in the court office other than a decree or order made in open court shall be
open to inspection by any person without the leave of the district judge, and no copy of any such
document, or of an extract from any such document, shall be taken by, or issued to any person without
such leave."
2.
In his able submissions to this court Dr Pelling has emphasised that all the issues which he seeks to
argue are at large. He submits, correctly, that this court is not strictly bound by the decision of the
European Court of Human Rights and that we must exercise an independent judgment as to whether
the statutory provisions of which he complains are in breach of his rights under Articles 6 and 10 of
the ECHR. As to the decision of this court in \tRe P-B\t he states, correctly, that it is not conclusive since\t
it predates the commencement of the Human Rights Act 1998. As to the decision of this court in
Clibbery v. Allan \tDr Pelling states, correctly, that it is a decision upon proceedings brought under part\t
IV of the Family Law Act 1996 and not the Children Act 1989. Finally Dr Pelling observes that the
decisions of this court in \tRe Pelling-Bruce\t and of the ECHR in \tB v. UK; P v. UK\t are upon different\t
statutory provisions, in that his incompatibility application is directed to S. 97(2) of the Children Act
1989, a provision that was inserted by S. 72(a) of the Access to Justice Act 1999 with effect from 27 \tth\t
September 1999.

3.
Arguing the issue of public versus private hearings under the Children Act 1989 Dr Pelling makes
many forceful points. He prays in aid Judge Goldstein’s 1996 characterisation of his own case as "run
of the mill". Were the proceedings conducted publicly it would be of little or no general interest and
would attract little or no reporting. Given the fundamental importance of the open conduct of justice
(ringingly declared by the House of Lords in \tScott v. Scott\t (1913) AC 417) the presumption must be\t
for public hearing unless the exceptional circumstances of the individual case demand a private
hearing. Dr Pelling submits, "…relying on \tRe Geldof (Celebrities: Publicity)\t [1999] 1 FLR 409 CA at\t
417F-418A," that children must inevitably participate in whatever sort of life their parents have
chosen for themselves as adults. His choice is the life of a campaigner. His son knows of and
understands that choice and its attendant publicity.
4.
Dr Pelling scorns the suggestion that the needs of a democratic society require litigation concerning
children to be conducted in private. The United Kingdom offers the example of a state that operates
the public model in one region and the private model in another: the restrictions uniformly applied in
England and Wales are unknown in Scotland.
5.
He submits that there are no convincing rationalisations of the need for private hearings in any of the
authorities. The rationalisation in paragraph 38 of the decision of the European Court of Human is
Rights is in these terms: -
"To enable the deciding judge to gain as full and accurate a picture as possible of the advantages and
disadvantages of the various residence and contact options open to the child, it is essential that the
parents and other witnesses feel able to express themselves candidly on highly personal issues
without fear of public curiosity or comment."
6.
To that Dr Pelling responds that it is pure speculation without any evidential foundation. Where is the
research-based evidence to justify that conclusion? In his own case the respondent accepted that she
would not have withdrawn her participation had the court ordered a public hearing.
7.
Dr Pelling refers to the justification of private hearings articulated by Hale LJ in refusing an
application for permission to appeal in the case of \tRe A\t [2003] EWCA Civ. 210\t on 4 \tth\t February 2003.\t
In the course of the judgment she said in paragraph 5: -
"On the one hand, there is the need to protect the welfare of children. This can arise in a variety of
ways. Children can be directly affected by the publication of material about them. If this comes to the
notice of their school friends or others, then they may be the subject of jokes, teasing, bullying, and
worse. Children, particularly of primary school age, are greatly susceptible to embarrassments of this
sort. The other way in which it can be harmful to children is if it serves to undermine the confidence
and the ability to cope of the person who is looking after the child."
8.
Of that Dr Pelling again submitted that this was no more than general speculation. Any ruling on child
welfare had to be case specific. In his case he had called the evidence of a father, Mr Matthew
O’Connor, who had established that his two children had thrived despite the fact that the contest
between their parents had been fully exposed in the media.

9.
In relation to the ECHR Dr Pelling submitted that his rights arising under Articles 6(1) and Article
10(1) were not to be trumped by asserted Article 8 rights attributed to the respondent or to his child
and imported into Articles 6 and 10 respectively. That he described as the great fallacy. Properly
construed, Dr Pelling submitted, Article 10 was the trump card and in its construction more weight
should be paid to Articles 17 and 18. The exception in Article 10(2) "for the protection of the rights of
others" was not to be construed, in violation of Articles 17 and 18, as extending to the Convention
"rights and freedoms" of others. If the Convention rights themselves had been intended to be included
then the phrase "rights and freedoms" would have been used in Article 10(2) as in the other exception
Articles 8(2), 9(2) and 11(2). "Rights" in Article 10(2) meant domestic law rights and English law had
no such right of privacy. Similarly, none of the exceptions in Article 6(1) to public trial incorporated
Article 8(1) rights as such.
10.
More specifically Dr Pelling submitted that Bennett J erred in his refusal to allow a public trial of his
application for a declaration of incompatibility and of his application for Certiorari. He pointed out
that in 1996 Judge Goldstein had heard his application for public trial in public. Bennett J’s refusal
had disappointed a number of members of the public who had made a journey to the court. Their
exclusion could only work to erode public confidence in the process.
11.
Dr Pelling’s specific submissions in relation to S.97(2)/(4) were that the government had enacted this
amendment having been alerted by the progress of the applications of Dr Pelling and Mr B in Europe
to the weak statutory foundation for private hearings under the Children Act in the County Court and
in the High Court. Dr Pelling submits that the provisions of S.97(2) are designed to restrict rights of
free speech recognised at common law. The decision in \tX v. Dempster \t(1999) 1FLR 894 establishes\t
that there is no common law restraint on identification of parties to Children Act proceedings nor was
there any statutory restraint prior to the enactment of S.97(2). The reservation contained in S. 97(4) is
too narrowly framed to amount to a justification for the restraint. He asks, rhetorically, what sort of
freedom is it that requires a court order before it can be exercised? He draws attention to an article
by Mr Timothy Scott QC appearing at [2003] Family Law 594, in which Mr Scott comments critically
upon S. 97(2) and (4).
12.
Dr Pelling is equally trenchant in his criticism of the terms in which Bennett J explained the various
exercises of his discretion both in relation to private hearing and the refusal of public judgment. Many
of the submissions advanced by Dr Pelling in general are repeated by him in his specific criticisms of
the exercise of the judicial discretion.
13.
Mr Cobb presents the rival arguments clearly and succinctly. Whatever may be the legal distinction
sought to be drawn by Dr Pelling the present application and appeal offers nothing that was not
considered and rejected by this court and by the European Court of Human Rights in relation to the
hearing before Judge Goldstein. As to the genesis of S.97(2) Mr Cobb suggests that it may result from
the 1993 public consultation. He informs us that the Official Solicitor sought the amendment of S.97
in order to remove the need to apply for an injunction in the higher courts to prevent disclosure of
identifying information. As to the Rules 4.16, 4.23 and 10.20, Mr Cobb emphasises that in each case
there is discretion conferred upon the judge to permit publicity.

14.
In relation to domestic authority, Mr Cobb draws attention to the recent decision of Munby J in the
case of \tRe B (Child) (Disclosure)\t [2004] EWHC 411 (Fam)\t. \t
15.
In relation to the ECHR, Mr Cobb accepts that Dr Pelling has established an interference with his
rights under Article 10(1), but under Article 10(2) that is justified since the interference is necessary
and proportionate to ensure the protection of the rights of the child arising under Articles 6 and 8.
16.
Whilst the conduct of trials is regulated by statutory provision, Mr Cobb accepts that whether the
pronouncement of judgment is to be in public or private is left to be regulated by the judges
themselves.
17.
We have considerable sympathy for Dr Pelling’s basic premise that the rationalisation of the current
practice is expressed in very general terms that certainly appear to lack evidential foundation.
However there can be no escaping the reality that Dr Pelling’s current challenge to the English
practice of private hearings for Children Act litigation is not different in kind or character to his
previous challenge. The statutory provisions may have changed but the underlying ground of
challenge has not been suggested to be any different. Whilst he has deployed attractive arguments, all
those arguments were deployed in Strasbourg. Whilst we may not be strictly bound, we would
challenge the fundamental purpose of the ECHR were we to prefer the conclusions of the minority to
those of the majority without any fresh development or argument to justify departure.
18.
Equally the point which this court settled in determining the appeal of \tRe P-B \tis in reality the very\t
point that we are called upon to decide. Dr Pelling’s reliance on rights conferred by Article 6 and 10
were carefully considered. Although not strictly bound by that decision we can see no legitimate
ground to depart from it.
19.
In its decision in \tB v. UK and P v. UK \tthe court concluded: - \t
"52. The court refers to its above findings in connection with Article 6(1) of the Convention that it was
justifiable, in order to protect the privacy of the children and parties and to avoid prejudicing the
interests of justice, to hold the residence proceedings in chambers and to limit the extent to which the
County Courts’ judgments were made available to the general public. In the light of these findings the
court does not find it necessary to examine the complaint under Article 10 separately."
20.
It is perhaps unfortunate that the judgment does not elaborate upon the rejection of Dr Pelling’s
Article 10 complaint. Implicitly the court’s findings in relation to Article 6 were dispositive of his
complaint under Article 10. We would accept Mr Cobb’s contention that, whilst Dr Pelling’s rights
under Article 10(1) are engaged, the conduct of the proceedings in chambers are properly to be
regarded as "necessary in a democratic society, …for the protection of the …rights of others", namely
the rights of the respondent and the child under Article 8 of the Convention.
21.

In relation to Dr Pelling’s attack on the specific exercise of Bennett J’s discretion we need say no more
than that each determination was sufficiently explained and manifestly within the discretionary ambit.
We accept that greater justification is required for the refusal of the pronouncement of judgment in
public, given the almost universal practice of anonymising public judgments in Children Act cases.
Here Bennett J allowed publicity for his judgment on the open justice issues, albeit anonymising the
judgment.
22.
Further we concur with Bennett J’s characterisation of the application for a declaration of
incompatibility and the application for Certiorari. These were not freestanding applications capable of
severance. They were no more than additional mechanisms used by Dr Pelling in an endeavour to
procure public trial and judgment of the Children Act proceedings.
23.
Dr Pelling’s attack on the imposition of the standard restriction on the identification of the identity of
the child and the parties to the present appeal must be considered in the light of an authority which
was not cited in the course of oral submissions by either Dr Pelling or Mr Cobb, although it was
analysed critically by Dr Pelling in Paragraphs 41-43 of his written skeleton in the court below. It is
the case of \tRe R (Minor) (Court of Appeal: Order against Identification)\t [1999] 2 FLR 145. The\t
constitution of the court was the Master of Rolls sitting with Butler-Sloss and Evans LJJ. The applicant
before the court was Mr B, subsequently to be Dr Pelling’s co-applicant in Strasbourg. On the 1 \tst\t
December 1998 he applied to set aside the standard form of order incorporated into the dismissal on
17 \tth\t November 1997 of his appeal against the making of a section 91(14) order. \t
24.
The order which Mr B applied to set aside was in these terms:-
"…and it is further ordered that no one shall publish or reveal the name or address of the minor child
who is the subject of these proceedings or publish or reveal any particular or particulars or other
information which would be likely to lead to the identification of the said minor."
25.
In giving the leading judgment, Lord Woolf, MR explained that this was a standard and automatic
inclusion in any order of the Court of Appeal in any child case and that this practice had originated
with the authority and agreement of Lord Bingham when he was Master of the Rolls.
26.
Lord Woolf specifically explained the advantages of anonymity. He said:-
"A general direction …exists because it is appreciated that in the court below the hearing is in
chambers (in normal circumstances the public will have no access to those proceedings unless they
make special arrangements to hear them; in children proceedings the public do not normally have
access; the matter is subject to rule 4.16(7) of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991), while in this court
the proceedings are in public. It is considered highly desirable that appellate proceedings wherever
possible should be in open court, and the judgment which is given should be available to the public
and the profession through the normal court reporting procedures.
In the great majority of cases, this could have adverse consequences so far as children are concerned.
In a case where a child’s parents are in dispute as to how the child should be brought up or cared for,
to identify the child might subject that child to stress and anxiety. It is important that the child, who

cannot be said to be other than entirely innocent, should not be damaged by the fact that his or her
parents are not in a position to agree amicably as to the future care for that child, or because there
are some other disputes as to the child’s upbringing. It is therefore accepted by this court that in
general the identity of the child should be protected. That is why the order was made in this case."
27.
Later Lord Woolf explained the advantage of a standing practice. He said: -
"If there is a standing instruction and there are circumstances (which will be the minority of cases)
which make publicity desirable, then the relevant matters can be drawn to the court’s attention. There
is always a danger in cases of this nature that a court, through oversight, fails to given the direction
that the order should be included. There might be cases where if the order was accidentally omitted,
great harm could be caused to an individual child."
Lord Woolf concluded his judgment by saying: -
"Notwithstanding the arguments which have been advanced by Mr B, I can see no objection to the
present practice. The skeleton argument of the applicant refers to authorities which, in my judgment,
are not inconsistent with that which I have indicated in this judgment. It is probably fortunate that Mr
B felt it right to take this point of principle because it will have the desirable result of enabling the
court’s judgment to record and giving its approval of the practice and in consequence draw it to the
attention of those who might not otherwise be aware of it. The court is always particularly anxious
that its proceedings should be as open as possible. The practice enables that to happen."
28.
The practice was introduced in March 1995. It was done in the exercise of the Court’s inherent
jurisdiction and was intended to reach wider than the terminology of S.39 of the Children and Young
Persons Act 1933 ("…Particulars calculated to lead to the identification…").
29.
In his written skeleton of 4 \tth\t May Dr Pelling expands his attack on the authority of \tRe R\t . First he\t
says that it falls within that narrow category of cases that can be rejected as binding precedent on the
grounds of manifest error. Second Dr Pelling submits that the case is not to be followed because of
inconsistency with earlier decisions of the court, particularly \tMrs R v. Central Independent Television\t
Plc\t (1994) 2 FLR 151 and \tRe Z (A Minor) (Freedom of publication) \t(1996) 1 FLR 19 and \tRe Geldof\t
(Celebrities: Publicity) \t[1999] 1FLR 409 CA. Third he submits that the decision predated the advent of\t
the Human Rights Act 1998 and must yield to Article 10 of the Convention. The practice would be
impossible to justify within the terms of Article 10(2). Fourth he submits that the decision is
manifestly contrary to the principles stated by the House of Lords in the case of \tAttorney-General v.\t
Leveller Magazine Ltd \t(1979) AC 440. \t
30.
Mr Cobb in his further written submissions of the 6 \tth\t May notes that the decision in \tRe R\t not only\t
predates the Human Rights Act 1998 (which came into force on 2 \tnd\t October 2000) but also the CPR\t
1998 (which came into force on 26 \tth\t April 1999). Accordingly Mr Cobb puts the Crown’s case thus: - \t
ii.
Prior to any hearing (for permission or otherwise) before the Court of Appeal, it is legitimate for the
court to treat the restriction on the publication of information relating to the identity of the child

(which will have applied in the court of trial by virtue of S.12 of the Administration of Justice Act 1960
and S.97 of the Children Act 1989) as continuing until the commencement of any hearing.
iii.
Thereafter any standing restriction to be generally and automatically applied should be the subject of
a Practice Direction in the drafting of which particular attention should be paid to CPR Rule 39.2(4);
39PD.1, para.1.4A; 39PD.1, para.1.9-1.13; and 52.PD.2, para2.2.
iv.
Nevertheless, even if the issue be made the subject of a Practice Direction the court should hereafter
consider publicity issues at the commencement, and generally at the conclusion, of all appeal hearings
relating to children and make a judgment on the balance between the competing rights arising under
Articles 6, 8 and 10.
1.
In our judgment the only successful attack directed by Dr Pelling on the judgment of this court in \tRe R\t
is his third. We accept the submissions of the Crown that the time has come for the court to consider
in each case whether a proper balance of competing rights requires the anonymisation of any report
of the proceedings and judgment following a hearing that was conducted in public and therefore open
to all who cared to attend.
2.
Standing back from Dr Pelling’s detailed contentions, it is important to emphasise that the questions
which he debates are essentially policy questions. Whilst we have concluded that the procedure
ordained by the Family Proceedings Rules 1991 and Children Act 1989 are essentially convention
compliant, it does not follow that the rival procedures for which Dr Pelling contends would not equally
be convention compliant. During the course of his judgment in \tRe P-B\t Thorpe LJ drew attention to the\t
opportunity, if not the obligation, of the government to complete the process of public consultation on
this debate: see 64F to H. More detailed reference to this uncompleted consultation exercise was
made during the course of his judgment in \tClibbery v. Allan\t (2002) 1 FLR 565 see paragraphs 95-97.\t
This thirst for disclosure of the outcome of the 1993 consultation is only quickened by the Crown’s
reliance on one response as the genesis of the 1999 amendment of S.97. Given the imminent creation
of the Family Justice Council it would seem to us to be appropriate for questions concerning privacy
both of hearings and of judgments in the family justice system to be referred to the Council.
3.
In her recent administrative directions issued following the judgment of the Court of Appeal Criminal
Division \tR v. Cannings\t [2004] EWCA Crim. 1\t the President stated: - \t
"It is also worth giving consideration to increasing the frequency with which anonymised family court
judgments in general are made public. According to current convention, judgments are usually made
public where they involve some important principle of law which in the opinion of the judge makes the
case of interest to the law reporters. In view of the current climate and increasing complaints of
"secrecy" in the family justice system, a broader approach to making judgments public may be
desirable."
4.
It might have been thought that Dr Pelling would welcome this statement as some acknowledgement
of the strength of support for his campaign. However in his submissions he was only critical of the
President, submitting that it was not for the judges but for Parliament to determine the extent to

which judges are to pronounce judgment in public. Dr Pelling submits that such decisions, whether of
a general or of a specific character, must not be taken by judges. In relation to specific cases he
submits, and in his third skeleton he embroiders the submission with what he says is a specific
illustration, judges may use their access to publicity to the disadvantage of the litigant who has no
equal right and no opportunity to respond.
5.
We acknowledge that there may be some justification in this submission. Bentham would certainly
recognise that judges may prefer to do their work without exposure to what may be critical publicity.
Bentham would say that without such exposure an unguarded risk of undesirable practices is created.
So it seems to us that, just as the desirability of private trials in child cases is a policy issue, so too is
the desirability of private judgments in child cases and also the question of whether such public
judgments should be anonymised. The judgment of this court in \tRe R\t indicates that the automatic\t
application of restrictions in all appeals involving children was developed or confirmed by the court
with the approval of the Master of the Rolls nearly ten years ago. The court’s power to impose
restrictions has two foundations in law: inherent jurisdiction and S.39 of the Children and Young
Persons Act 1933. We do not consider that S.97(2) of the Children Act 1989 extends to appellate
proceedings in this court. As to the court’s inherent powers see the recent decision of \tRe S\t \t
(Identification: Restrictions on Publication)\t (2003) 2FLR 1253. S.39(1) of the Children and Young\t
Persons Act 1933 provides that: -
"In relation to any proceedings in any court…the court may direct that:
(a) No newspaper report of the proceedings shall reveal the name, address or school, or include any
particulars calculated to lead to the identification of any child or young person concerned in the
proceedings, either as being the person by or against or in respect of whom the proceedings are
taken, or as being a witness therein;
(b) No picture shall be published in any newspaper as being or including a picture of any child or
young person so concerned in the proceedings as aforesaid;
except in so far (if at all) as may be permitted by the direction of the court."
6.
Clearly both the inherent jurisdiction and the statutory provision empower this court to impose
restrictions in an individual case in the exercise of the court’s discretion. But it is not so evident that
either the inherent or the statutory jurisdiction justifies the imposition of an automatic restriction
without the exercise of a specific discretion in the individual case. Indeed in his subsequent written
submission Mr Cobb suggests that for the future the court should both at the outset and at the
conclusion of each appeal concerning children exercise a specific discretion either to impose or to
refuse prohibition on the identification of the parties to the appeal. It would therefore seem to us to be
desirable for the Master of the Rolls and the President to review the standard practice of this court to
reflect developments since the decision pronounced in \tRe R \tin 1998. This reconsideration should\t
perhaps extend to applications for permission to appeal listed for oral hearing. In relation to such
hearings Mr Cobb submits that the need for caution is all the greater given that: -
(a) Permission to appeal is ordinarily sought in the first instance court where statutory protections
apply;

(b) Applications for permission to the Court of Appeal are ordinarily considered by a single Lord
Justice on paper which would have the protection of confidentiality under Rule 52.3 (3) – (4);
(c) Oral hearings for permission are often listed without notice at which the respondent is not present
to argue against publicity.
7.
Policy questions do have to be addressed against this background: in reality although the Family
Proceedings Rules confer on the judge in any case the discretion to lift the veil of privacy, there is
such a strong inherited convention of privacy that the judicial mind is almost never directed to the
discretion and in rare cases where an application is made a fair exercise may be prejudiced by the
tradition or an unconscious preference for the atmosphere created by a hearing in chambers. Judges
need to be aware of this and to be prepared to consider another course where appropriate.
8.
The subsequent submissions of Mr Cobb and of Dr Pelling consider in erudite detail the comparable
law and practice in Scotland governing the conduct of and publicity given to both public law and
private law applications both historically and currently under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. For
the purposes of the present appeal it is unnecessary to record or analyse those submissions in any
detail. Historically Mr Cobb accepts that the general rule of law is that cases are heard in public in
Scotland unless there is a good reason for them to be heard in private. In paragraph 23 of his
subsequent submissions Mr Cobb states: -
"The application of the general rule to the Court of Session dates back to an Act of 1693 which
provided that the court should sit "with open doors"; the principle, which applies in all courts, is also
rooted in the common law, as is the discretion to depart from it in exceptional cases in the interest of
the administration of justice."
9.
Dr Pelling, in his subsequent written submissions fairly summarises the present practice in Scotland
when he states:
"It is clear that run of the mill residence and contact cases are routinely public in access to the court,
judgment and reporting, at all levels of the court and that there is no damage to the administration of
justice."
10.
Dr Pelling in his earlier skeleton arguments offered a comparative analysis of the practices in a
number of other Council of Europe countries. We do not consider it necessary to consider this
material further. Given that the European Court allows a wide margin of appreciation to individual
jurisdictions it is enough to conclude that evidence of disparity does not advance Dr Pelling’s case.
The tradition for open sittings and the tradition for private sittings are each equally capable of
compliance with the Convention. In the end the more convincing defence of the practice in our
jurisdiction may be the most simple, namely that it is reflective of a long standing tradition, of general
but not universal application, that has been franked by the European Court as Convention compliant.
11.
In conclusion therefore we grant Dr Pelling’s application for permission but dismiss the appeal.
